---
layout: post
title: Cats and the Art of Flexible
---

# {{ page.title }}

<p class="meta">27-July-2011</p>

Along with git, I also love cats - but for a whole different set of reasons.

I personally happen to think cats are about three steps above man on the evolutionary scale.

Cats are flexible. In both mind and body. I can take a cat who trusts me (the trust is key, of course) and almost tie it in a knot. No resistance on the part of the cat. Just another day. The cat may internally wonder WTF I'm doing, but it will simply bat its eyes at me unless what I'm doing starts to hurt. Something different happening they haven't seen before? Curiosity will prevail.

If I yell at my cat, for whatever reason, it'll scamper. Twenty minutes later it's cuddling in my lap like nothing happened. No resentment, no hard feelings, garbage-in-garbage-out. Try that with a human.

Cats are masters of focus and concentration. When they're eating, they're eating. When they're hunting, they're hunting. When they're sleeping, they're sleeping. When they're playing, they're fully engrossed in whatever it is they're playing with. When they're grooming themselves, it's all about the grooming - nothing else matters. I've yet to see a cat attempt to drive, eat, groom, and talk on a cell phone. And when a cat wants to sit in your lap - it wants to sit in your lap RIGHT F'ing NOW; not when you're finished mucking about with whatever you're mucking about with.

In case you're curious, I have three cats. They're all unique - every bit as unique as my children.

Why three? Because I don't want four.

Where I am heading with this? It's an elaborate lead-in to a question a friend asked the other day. To paraphrase, he asked "How do you do it? Who do you manage to stay so calm in the midst of the storms you sometimes face? How do you keep emotion out of the logic you apply to situations? How do you stay above the constant flow of shit and "hardship" I see flowing around you some days?" At first I didn't have a good answer. I think I do now, after a bit of reflection:

Answer: (1) Thirty years studying the ways of Zen and Buddhism; (2) After being around cats for as long as I have, and having watched them for as long as I have, I've adopted an almost unconscious "cat-like" mindset. Which may or may not be intertwined with the Buddhist thing - don't know; don't care. It is.

Throw me up in the air, and 99.9% of the time I'll land on my feet. Sneak up on me and shout "BOO" in my ear, and chances are I'll simply look at you curiously.

Somewhere way deep inside - in that part of the brain that doesn't explain itself - I fully and completely understand why the Egyptians worshiped cats. I won't go so far as to say I worship them, but they have my unwavering respect.

And although I have no way of knowing, I can only trust that somehow I return something of value to them in exchange for the valuable lessons they taught me over the years.
