---
layout: post
title: Horn Tooting
---

# {{ page.title }}

<p class="meta">30 August 2011</p>

I have a problem. It's not life-threatening, and it's not likely to induce any kind of personality disorder. But it's a problem nonetheless.

I'm not very good at tooting my own horn.

Ask any marketing guru or career specialist, and they'll tell you - beyond a shadow of a doubt - that being able to market yourself effectively is vitally important to the maintenance and feeding of a successful career path. OK. Fair enough. I'm still not good at it. Or maybe I've not yet found a career path compelling enough to push me over the edge.

The fact remains, I have a gift. And unless I tell someone about that gift, it will remain a "dirty little secret" (well, maybe not dirty, but a secret nonetheless); hidden and unable to reach full potential.

So what's my secret? I'm a writer. Specifically, according to industry recognized nomenclature, I'm a technical writer. I'm exceptionally good at translating the act of "how to do stuff" into words; words that can be understood by people, and reverse-translated. You read what I write, grok it at a cognitive level, and can then take that grok and reproduce the physical or intellectual motions I've described in words.

All well and good, but what's significant about that?

Well, depending on who you ask, technical writers are few and far between. Good technical writers are like oxygen in the earth's upper atmosphere. Rare. Or so some people I highly respect tell me.

I branched my personal git repository about 6 weeks ago - started a new "development" branch, so to speak. My new branch is devoid of all traces of baby-sitting people, thinking for them, or being a fireman because the people I work for see no value in teaching people not to play with matches. I'm currently testing the stormy waters of the publishing industry - again. I'm not where I want to be (which is why the branch is tagged "develop"), but my mind is relatively clear again, and it feels good to stretch my neurons in a creative way.

If you know someone who's looking for a good technical writer, drop me a line. I'm looking for somewhere to roost. I don't know much about crowing, but I lay some pretty decent eggs.
